In a spring evening, when kings went to war, David stayed behind, watching the fading light.
From his rooftop, he saw Bathsheba and desire stirred, a seed of sin.
What began as a glance became a choice, shattering the integrity of a just heart.
He called for her, though bound by covenant, and sin took root.
in the shadow of power.
When whispers of a child reached his ears, David sought to conceal what he had done, but Uriah's honor stood unyielding, surpassing the king after God's own heart.
With a heavy pen, David sealed his fate.
Uriah fell where death was certain, and a king's betrayal lay hidden in the dust.
The Lord sent Nathan to expose the truth.
David is feeling the weight and the consequences of his sin.
And we saw him last week walking out of
Jerusalem, leaving the ark of the covenant behind, the throne behind, the crown behind, and he's walking into the wilderness barefoot, head covered, people crying all around him.
He's walking toward the wilderness, the place he spent 10 years running from cave to cave, from place to place, running away from Saul.
And now he's going back to that place as a consequence of his own sin.
And you know, when you're down,
When you experience a crisis, well, you find out the true character of the people around you because there's nothing like crisis to reveal who your real friends are.
Anybody know what I'm talking about?
And so he's going to meet on his way out of the city some friends and some enemies.
And he's not going to know really which ones or which summer undercover summer in disguise.
This chapter is filled with a lot of intrigue.
I mean, there are
spies and plots and secret messages.
This is like a mission impossible series.
And there's about a dozen names that, again, having a Bible in front of you is really gonna help you because, well, we're gonna see people acting in all kinds of ways.
We're gonna see him experience the deep loyalty of people who have no reason to follow him but choose to because they're faithful friends.
And we're also gonna experience and feel the sting of betrayal.
where someone who David thought was a faithful friend turns on him.
And all of us, if we're honest, we know those moments where you're like, oh, I thought that person was my friend.
I thought I could trust them.
And it makes me want to give up not just on that friend, but on friendship itself.
And we're going to see how God can use friends in our lives in powerful ways so that we don't have this cynical view of friendship like it's
Like it's never going to work out.
We can't trust anyone.
We had to be suspicious of everybody.
I can only trust God.
But we also don't want to be naive about friendship that they're all going to work out.
And it's always going to be great.
And somewhere in between, we will see this powerful expression of friendship.
So last week, David's walking out.
He meets a man named Itai.
Itai is a Philistine commander of 600 men.
And David says, hey, listen, this is not your fight.
You came from Philistine.
You have no reason to stay with me.
So go to Absalom or go home and he says, no.
King, my loyalty is to you, my family, my soldiers, we're gonna live with you or we're gonna die with you.
You are my king and he says it publicly and decisively.
Sort of like that song, we sing, I've decided to follow Jesus, no turning back.
He pledged his allegiance to his king and there's something so beautiful about a man who says, I don't care what it cost me.
I am gonna fight with my king and David says to him two words.
March on.
How many guys love friends, you just say, hey, no matter what happens, we're gonna march on together.
And this is this beautiful connection he has with Itai.
He also, it meets two priests, Zadak and Abiathar, these priests, he says, don't come with me, go back into the city, you're gonna be my eyes and my ears, you're gonna be my spies.
And so in the very beginning of this really rough moment in David's life, as he walks out of the city, these allies and these friendships emerge and deepen, but then he gets some really bad news.
In chapter 15, verse 30,
One.
Now David had been told, a hit the fell is among the conspirators with Absalom.
So David prayed, Lord, turn a hit the fell's counsel into foolishness.
A hit the fell is the chief advisor of David.
A hit the fell was David's right hand guy.
The guy that would whisper in his ear.
The guy that would give him more counsel and advice.
We're going to find out later in this chapter that a hit the fell's advice was like the voice and wisdom of God.
There was some special gift this guy had to advise kings, and David finds out his chief advisor, his chief counsel, has just left him to go over to Absalom, his son, who's trying to kill him, the one who's leading the coup, and this staying in betrayal.
And if you want to know what David's thinking and feeling during this time, as he's walking out toward the wilderness, as he's feeling the staying in betrayal, as he's wondering who's actually with him and who's trying to kill him,
Well, most scholars believe that Psalm 41 and Psalm 61, 62, 63 were written during this time.
And Psalm 41 describes as David writes us how vulnerable he feels, how weak he feels.
He hears the whispers.
He hears the conspiracy of people trying to take his life.
And in that Psalm, he writes this, even my close friend, someone I trusted, one who shared my bread has turned against me.
This is likely written about Hithaphon.
This sense of betrayal, that person who was so close, part of his inner circle, has now turned against him.
This same verse would be used to describe another man named Judas, a man who also turned on his king.
So David utters the prayer of God, take this wise man's counsel and frustrate it, turn it into foolishness.
And right after he says amen, what happens next?
Look at verse 32.
When David arrived at the summit,
where people used to worship God?
Hushai, the archive, was there to meet him.
And his robe was torn and there was dust on his head.
And David said to him, if you go with me, you'll be a burden to me.
But if you return to the city and say to Absalom, your majesty, I will be your servant.
I was your father's servant in the past, but now I will be your servant.
Then you can help me by frustrating Hithafel's advice.
And won't the priest Zaidok and Abayathar be there with you?
Tell them anything you hear in the king's palace.
They're two sons.
Ahamez, the son of Zadok, and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar are there with him.
Send them to me with anything you hear.
So Hushai, David's confidant, arrived in Jerusalem as Absalom was entering the city.
David prays a prayer, frustrate his advice, and now all of a sudden another one of his advisors, a man of great wisdom, a guy named Hushai, arrives there and says, hey, I'm going to go with you.
He's in the morning, he's walking along like everyone else.
He's like, no, no, don't come with me.
You're gonna be much more used to me if you go back into the city and you pretend to be an ally of Absalom.
And here's what you're gonna say to him.
As I was faithful to your father, I'm gonna be faithful to you.
He gives him words to say and who's shy.
If you look at the entire text of his life, almost every time you see his name, you see this word.
He is the confidant of the king or he is the friend of the king.
This is his identity.
And this becomes his sense of purpose.
I am the trusted friend of the king.
And so, I wish I had great risk to himself, goes back into the city.
Remember, if you need this plot, it gets uncovered.
If Zayadok or a Bithar, or wish I could discover, they're gonna be executed.
So they're taking a big risk to go back and eat the eyes and ears for David in this moment.
But I want you to think about how David prays a prayer, and this guy shows up and will trace how
who shy is an answer to David's prayer.
Now, as Absalom enters the city, the conspiracy, the coups is begun, David, all of his men are fleeing, they're walking out in mourning.
And now as David's walking out of the city of Jerusalem, well, he's gonna meet some people on the road, the first guys, a man named Ziba.
Then David had gone a short distance beyond the summit in there was Ziba, the steward of a Fibosheth, waiting to meet him.
He had a string of donkey saddled loaded with 200 loaves of bread, 100 cakes of raisins, 100 cakes of figs, and a skin of wine.
The king Azeba, why have he brought these?
Azeba answered, the donkeys are for the king's household to ride on, and the bread and the fruit are for the men to eat, and the wine is to refresh those who have become exhausted in the wilderness.
The king then asked, well, where's your master's grandson?
Azeba said to him, he's staying in Jerusalem because he thinks today
The Israelites will restore to me my grandfather's kingdom."
Then the king said to Zebo, all that belonged to Mephibosheth is now yours.
I humbly bow, Zeba said, may I find favor in your eyes, my Lord the king.
What's happening?
David's walking out of Jerusalem with his man and he meets this amazing, amazing
Food, and donkeys to write on, and wine to drink, and a way of refreshment.
And it's like, man, Ziba, oh, this is like some cool water on a hot day.
What a great guy, except what you don't know is Ziba is an opportunist.
He's lying and manipulating to win favor with David.
He tells a lie that his master, my feedback, remember the guy that was crippled in his legs, that David brought in and had to sit at his table and blessed him one of Saul's grandsons, one of Jonathan's sons?
David showed this man so much kindness.
And it was Ziba was the guy who was his steward, taking care of all the stuff.
And Ziba looks as this is an opportunity to get favor with David.
And so he brings him all these gifts, lies about his master.
Oh, he doesn't care about you.
He thinks that Absalom is going to restore the kingdom of Saul.
That's not even what the coup was about.
It makes no sense at all.
And you know what?
Because David is so on edge and doesn't know who to trust, he just believes Ziba and gives half
or actually all of the Phoebushes Kingdom, all of the possessions to Ziba, right there on the spot.
And here's the lesson.
When you're looking for friends and you don't know who to trust and someone appears to be that person who's generous and understands you and is for you, how many of you know that sometimes you can be manipulated and you can misjudge a person?
Anybody ever misjudge a person, right?
And so David misjudges Phoebushes and Ziba in this moment.
as he slanders another person.
And then David's gonna meet someone else.
Now, this person's a little more overt than this, but not undercover.
He's just overt.
His name is Shimeyai.
We'll get verse five.
As King David approaches Baharum, the man of the same clan as Saul's family came out from there and his name was Shimeyai, the son of Garah.
And he cursed as he came out.
He pelted David and all the king's officials with stones.
And though all the troops in the special guard were at David's right and left, and as he cursed, Shimeyai said,
Get out you murderer, you scoundrel.
The Lord has repaid you for all the blood you shed in the household of Saul, and whose place you have brain.
The Lord has given the kingdom into the hands of your son, Abslam, and you have come to ruin because you are a murderer.
Then Abishai, the son of Zeruai said to the king, why should this dead dog curse the Lord my king?
Let me go over and cut off his head.
All right, how many of you like friends like Abishai, right?
I mean, we all need a friend like this.
Can I go shut this guy up?
This insignificant little fraction of a man is defying David and his mighty men, throwing stones on them, cursing them.
Now, David killed all of Saul's family, which is not true.
David is guilty of the murder of Uriah.
We know this, but this guy is talking about something completely different.
You killed Saul's whole family.
You were always against him.
And David knows that's not true.
And so does Abishai because Abishai was there with the sword when David said, let's go to the camp of Saul and Abishai is the one who said, with one thrust of my spear, I can kill him.
I won't strike twice.
And David said, and we're not going to touch Saul.
He is the Lord's anointed.
If God wants to give me the kingdom, he's going to give it to me on his own.
But here's the thing about Abishai.
Every time you see him, he wants to kill somebody.
He's got one tool in his toolbox.
It's a sword, and he knows how to use it.
He's like, one of the captains of David's garb.
We're gonna read about him later as one of the leaders of the mighty men.
He is a warrior.
He says, let me just shut this guy up.
Let me cut off his head.
And David's like, no, Abish, I put away your sword.
There's another way to deal with this.
Verse 10, but the king said, what does this have to do with you, son of Zara?
He's cursing because the Lord said to him, curse David.
Who can ask, why do you do this?
David then said to Abishai and all his officials, my son, my own flesh and blood is trying to kill me.
How much more than this Benjamin leave him alone, let him curse for the Lord has told him to.
And it may be that the Lord's will look upon my misery and restore to me his covenant blessing instead of his curse today.
And so David and his men continued along the road while Shimi and I was going along the hillside opposite him, cursing as he went, throwing stones at him, showering him with dirt.
And the king and all the people with him arrived at their destination, exhausted.
And there he refreshed himself.
This is a picture, right?
The mighty king who yesterday was sitting on his throne with the crown on his head, with the ark of the covenant behind him, with his mighty men around him, in control of the nation.
is now walking out barefoot, head covered, crying, retreating, and now being cursed at, people throwing rocks at him, dirt on him, and David takes it.
He takes it.
And the guy is in his army, like just two seconds, we can shut this guy up.
David's like, no, this is the judgment of God, the discipline of God is on me, so I'm gonna take it,
We're all gonna take it.
And then he says this, because maybe verse 12, the Lord will look upon this misery, the way we're taking this.
And he will bless us.
He will not put on us the full weight about discipline that's coming.
This is the instinct that David has about God.
This instinct that God's grace is bigger than he can understand.
And he's confident that God can do something that he can't do himself, that he should not fight his own battles.
Notice he's not walking out of, he's not walking out of Jerusalem, taking the Ark of the Covenant, taking his crown.
He left all that behind.
He's like, I didn't fight for this kingdom or this throne, and I'm not gonna fight to control it.
I'm gonna give myself to God because that's the safest place for me to be, right?
And this is a powerful, powerful lesson.
So how do you handle criticism?
When people throw those little pebbles at you in the head, or they curse at you, they slander you, they tell lies about you, they throw dirt on you,
It's so easy to want to fight back.
You get the perfect thing you want to say.
If someone says something to you online that you got, I got the perfect thing I want to say back, don't do it.
Don't return evil for evil.
You don't fight fire with fire.
You fight fire with water, right?
There's a different way to fight the evil that comes to you, the slander that comes to you.
I was talking to a Christian leader who may be one of the greatest Christian leaders of the last couple of decades.
And he was talking to a group of pastors and he said,
You know, God's testing every leader to see how they handle criticism because how you handle criticism is how much anointing God will give you.
And I started thinking about that.
He described that process like if you're crushed by one comment on the internet or by one criticism about you said this or you didn't say that or you said it the wrong way or and you wilt.
then there's no way that God can put you on a higher platform because it would crush and destroy you and your family and everyone else.
He's looking for a heart that understands that when that criticism comes, you take and say, God, this is for you.
And you're my defender and you know the truth and I'm gonna trust my future in your hands.
And there's something beautiful about the way David responds to slander and verbal abuse and insult.
And he walks through that humiliation quietly, confidently trusting
in God.
Now, meanwhile, back at the palace, Absalom comes, the coup is in place.
He's now sitting on David's throne, his dad's throne, and here's what happens next.
Meanwhile, Absalom and all the men of Israel came to Jerusalem, and Hippophel was with him.
Then Hushai, the archive, David's confident, went to Absalom and said to him, long lived the king, long lived the king.
And Absalom said to Hushai,
So this is the love you show for your friend.
If he's your friend, why didn't you go with him?
Who should I say to Absalom?
No.
The one chosen by the Lord, by the people and by all the men of Israel, his I will be and I will remain with him.
Furthermore, who should I serve?
Should I not serve the son just as I serve your father?
So I will serve you.
Again, who should I?
called a friend of the king, even Absalom knows, hey, you're the king's friend.
Why are you not with him?
Whatever who Shai says next could cost him his life.
And he says, no, I'm with the one that God picked.
I'm with the one of the people pick.
And just like I served your dad, I'm here to serve you.
And Absalom believes him, invites him into his inner circle.
So now they're in the inner circle, they're discussing war strategy.
How do we complete the coup and defeat David, verse 20?
Absalom said, do hit the fella.
Give us your advice.
What should we do?
And hit the fella answered, sleep with your father's concubines whom you left to take care of the palace.
Then all Israel will hear that you have made yourself obnoxious to your father and the hands of everyone with you will be more resolute.
So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof and he slept with his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.
What is going on?
As the fellow, the chief advisor of the man with military wisdom says, okay, here's the first part of solidifying your throne.
Go have sex with the 10 concumines, sort of the wives that David left.
And this is like a scorched earth kind of thing.
There's no, you're burning every bridge.
There's no way that once you do this, that there's any way back.
Either David dies or you die, either your dad dies or you die, but once you do this, everyone's gonna know, hey, this isn't just, let me just try this out and see what works.
This is the ultimate way to just erase David's legacy.
And sadly enough, this fulfills the prophecy of Nathan about David's enemy from his own house doing this exact same thing.
And where does it hit the fell, this man who's
It was David's chief advisor.
Where does this come from?
Well, we talked about this last week.
A hit the fell was this close to David, a chief confidant and chief advisor, but he was also the grandfather of Bathsheba.
He watched David do what David did, killing Bathsheba's husband, Uriah, and covering it up.
And somehow that level of anger turned to vengeance, and then it turned to ambition.
And ambition has a way to blind you.
to get revenge, to make it right.
I can't believe David did that to my granddaughter.
And so I'm not going to talk about it.
I'm not going to process it.
I'm just going to hold onto it and let it grow until it allows you to justify anything.
I mean, what happened to his granddaughter?
He now commanded that it happened to 10 other women who are completely innocent in this whole thing.
And he's going to use people to fulfill his plan.
And he's not going to feel a shred of guilt about it.
There is nothing.
that talks about ethical conviction that he knows this is wrong.
It's just calculated, deliberate.
And this is what seeking power does.
It allows you to rationalize and justify your actions and not feel guilty about it.
Remember, David had a chance to kill Saul and said, I'm not going to raise my hand against God's anointed.
A hit the bell has no such conviction.
He's orchestrating a coup, verse 23.
Now in those days, the advice of a hit the bell
It was like the one who inquires of God.
And this is how both David and Absalom regarded all of the Hithaphel's advice.
So Hithaphel said to Absalom, I would choose 12,000 men and set out tonight in pursuit of David.
I would attack him while he's weary and weak.
I would strike him with terror and then all the people with him will flee.
I would strike down only the king and bring all the people back to you.
The death of the man you seek will mean the return of all.
All the people will be unharmed.
And this plan seemed good to Abslam and to all the elders of Israel, but Abslam said, someone also who shy the archive so we can hear what he has to say as well.
And the fellow gives the advice, sleep with your father's concubines, let everyone see it, make it public, you're declaring, I'm the king, I've erased my dad's memory.
And assemble an elite strike force, 12,000 men, and leave right away.
and hunt David down and just kill him.
So it doesn't turn to this long, bloody, prolonged civil war.
Because once you kill David, everyone's going to turn and follow you.
And notice, here's what the fellas use you.
I will, I will, I will.
He's giving military advice.
And this is really great military advice.
He knows how to orchestrate a coup, but remember the prayer that David prayed, God?
Can you frustrate this man's advice?
And when David says, amen, this guy Hushai is right there, friend of the king.
And Absalom remembers, oh, yeah, that's right.
Hushai is here.
Let me ask his advice.
And so verse six, when Hushai came to Absalom, he said, the Hithafel has given this advice.
Should we do what he says?
If not, give us your opinion.
Hushai replied to Absalom, the advice that Hithafel has given is not good this time.
You know your father and his men, they are fighters as fierce as a wild bear robbed of her cubs.
Besides, your father's an experienced fighter.
He will not spend the night with the troops.
Even now he's hidden in a cave or some other place.
And if he should attack your troops first, whoever hears about it will say, there's been a slaughter among the troops who follow Abslam, then even the bravest soldier whose heart is like the heart of a lion will melt with fear.
For all Israel knows that your father is a fighter and that those who are with him are brave.
So I advise you,
Let all Israel from Dan to Bathsheba, as numerous as the sand on the seashore, be gathered to you, with you, yourself leading them into battle.
Then we will attack him wherever he may be found, and we will fall on him as deuce settles on the ground.
Neither he nor any of his men will be left alive.
And if he withdraws into a city, then all of Israel will bring ropes to the city, and we will drag it down to the valley until not so much as the pebble is left.
Absalom and all the men of Israel said, the advice of Hushai, the archive is better than the advice of Absalom.
For the Lord had determined to frustrate the good advice of Hithafel in order to bring disaster on Absalom.
And look at that last little note.
The last little note is God's working behind the scenes.
It looks like Absalom is in control.
He's got the military advantage.
He's got the
the military strategist advantage.
He's got all the advantages, but God is working against Abslam and against Hitthefell because God's ultimately the one who's in control.
Did you know that?
And so here's the lesson.
Be careful what coup you're involved in in your family, at your job, in your church, because you might find out that you're fighting against God himself.
And that's what Hitthefell and Abslam were about to find out.
So what is who should I do?
Well, you know, in cards, in poker, you don't play the hand, you play the man.
Who should I play as the man?
Watch what he does.
Maybe you already noticed.
I think I'll give his good advice.
This advice, if followed, would likely lead to the death of David, and Absalom would be on the throne.
But who should I have a couple of advantages?
One is he knows the advice has already been given.
And he's able in this moment to turn to Absalom's fear of failure
His daddy issues and his pride.
Watch what he does.
First he says this, the advice of a hit the bell is not good this time.
In other words, his advice is, he's 10 for 10, but this time it's not gonna work.
And here is why.
You know your dad.
Your dad is fierce.
Your dad is a fighter.
His men are courageous.
And if you think you're gonna hunt him down, he's not with his army.
He's hiding the cave.
There's no way you're gonna find him.
And he brings this legend of David, this fierce fighter who kills the life and who fights and kills the tens of thousands.
And it was the warrior who allowed the nation of Israel to be formed.
In reality, David is barefoot.
His head is covered.
He's exhausted.
He's hungry.
His army is not formed.
They're in the most vulnerable position they could be in, but Abslam knows the legend of his dad.
There's something about beating your dad.
I don't know if you're a father of sons, but every time my kids and I are playing basketball or ping pong, whatever, and it's like tied 10, 10, or 20, 20, and it's like the last game, I'll always stop and say, the law of the universe says the son should never beat the father.
I just want you to think about that for a second before this last point and somehow it gets in their head and they mess up.
It's not going to last forever, but it works so far.
Listen, there's that thing, right?
Absalom's got that going on.
And then he said, I got the thing I don't want to make a mistake, this fear of failure because, because I hit the fells, stretch is risky.
And, and who should I say, hey, I have a guarantee for you, a guarantee that just like do falls on the ground, the entire nation can come and crush me.
Maybe even he goes and hides in the city.
So I'm, I'm guaranteeing you victory, or hit the fells, maybe,
Maybe not, because there is a risk here.
If it doesn't work and you lose your first battle, no one's going to follow King who loses their first battle.
And so there's this fear of failure.
There's these data issues.
But more than that, who should I play as the man and Absalom?
I can already see you.
The entire nation gathered around you and you yourself, leaving the army.
and crushing your father.
You'll get the glory and you'll get the honor.
And all those things about David killing the wise and him being the greatest king will be forgotten because you'll be the greatest king because you beat him.
And you can have all that for yourself.
And we will be with you every step along the way.
And that sounds like, I love that vision.
That's an amazing picture.
And all the yes men around.
And I'm like, we like his advice way better than a hit the bell's advice.
And so, who should I quickly send messengers?
These sons of Zeta can buy a card to come and give a message, hey, I don't know which advice he's gonna take, but get over the Jordan quick, because this might go down really quickly, and the entire group of David, they flee across the Jordan that night, and the two spies have to hide in a well.
It's like mission-impossible stuff, you can read it on your own, but I mean, there's a lot of risk here, as the friends of David are trying to turn this coup back onto themselves, and hit the fell,
In chapter 17, verse 23, well, here's how a response to his advice not being taken.
When Hithfell saw that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and sent out for his house in his hometown.
He put his house in order and then he hanged himself.
And so he died and was buried in his father's tomb.
What?
Are you reading what I'm reading?
I hit the fella new.
Game over.
He knew.
He knew how to win the battle.
But when he saw his advice was not taken, he knew the writings on the wall, Absalom's a dead man.
Because of his own pride and bandy and ego and blindness and ambition and all those things, all those issues in his life, he knew he wasn't gonna make sound decisions.
Maybe the fella was like, I wanna be the right-hand guy and I realized maybe who's gonna be his right-hand guy.
Maybe he was hurt, jilted.
I'm not sure exactly what happened.
But as calculated and deliberate as he was in orchestrating the coup, he's as calculated and deliberate as he was in his own suicide.
He calmly gets on his donkey.
He calmly goes back to his home.
He puts all of his things in order.
And then he hangs himself.
And again, this is a picture of a New Testament figure named Judas, another figure who betrayed his king.
who felt this deep sense of regret, remorse, whatever it was.
And then he also hung himself.
And so the conspiracy is beginning to fall apart from its center.
Hithfell commits suicide.
And now David, as he's fleeing, meets three unexpected figures, verse 27.
When David came to Mahineem,
a show beat, and a man named Makiar, in a name marked Missua, brought Betty and bowls and articles of pottery and wheat and barley and flour and roasted grain and beans and lentils, honey and curds and sheep and cheese from cow's milk for David and his people to eat, for they said the people had become exhausted and hungry and thirsty in the wilderness.
Out of nowhere,
Three guys show up, and three guys you would not expect to show up.
Three very wealthy landowners.
One, a guy named Shelby, he's the brother of a guy named Hunan that was at war with David just a few chapters ago.
So his family is opposed to David, but he supports David this moment.
There's a guy named McKear, he's a part of Saul's clan.
Again, the clan that's against David, and then there's a senior citizen named Barzelli.
So you have a pagan, a Saul loyalist, and a senior citizen who basically
put themselves at risk by feeding David's entire army and his family.
Now, if you were a wealthy landowner and you were trying to see like what is in my best interest, you would have waited for the war to happen to see if Absalom wins or if David wins and then decide who to support.
Let me see this one out.
If you support the wrong person at the wrong time, then they're gonna come back on you, you helped him and they can lose everything.
But these three men apparently didn't care because sometimes doing what's right is a risk.
And they knew what was right.
And they fed his entire family, his entire army, his entire group of people.
They brought refreshment.
Unlike Ziba who's manipulating, they're actually risking to serve David in this moment of need.
And when I think about the song that David wrote, you prepare for me a table in the presence of my enemies.
Maybe he was referring to a moment like this, that God will provide for you in crisis this
luxurious meal just to show you.
I'm still defending you.
I'm still for you.
You're still my anointed king.
And I'm going to provide you this moment of our aces in the desert.
And I'm going to use three guys you do not expect to do that for you.
Now, the next time we revisit this chapter, a little spoiler alert, Abslam's rebellion is going to fail and he's going to die.
And David and all of his men, sorry, you're going to read ahead.
David's going to march back into the city, and he's going to pass all these characters again.
And all these guys, and this time, Ziba's manipulation is going to be found out.
I mean, Phoebus has going to be sitting right next to him.
They're going to find out the truth of the story.
And Shima is not going to be throwing rocks and dirt and cursing.
He's going to be on his face begging for his life.
And there's going to be rewards for those who are loyal to David.
And we're going to see how those things turn, because crisis reveals what's in your heart.
It reveals who your friends really are.
And so I wanted to talk about just some takeaways.
We open with this idea of friendship, that sometimes you wonder, is friendship worth it?
Are relationships worth it?
Because how many of you know relationships are hard?
And not just relationships with friends, but relationships with families.
I mean, think about all the ups and downs David has had in his life with relationships.
His father forgot him.
is the youngest son forgotten by his father, but Samuel believed in this old prophet who looked in his eyes and said, you are the next king of Israel.
Saul was the king who turned on him when there was no reason because of jealousy.
Jonathan, his son, was loyal to David even at great cost to himself.
So David's been experiencing the best of people and the worst of people.
And well, here's
Here's the idea, if we are overly naive, we'll be hurt by people over and over and over again, but if we're overly cynical, we'll end up very alone in life.
The reality is that David made friends and kept on trusting people and making friends because he trusted God.
You see, if you trust God, then no matter what happens with people, you can still take the risk to trust and build deep friendships with people because you know ultimately God is the one who has you, God is the one who holds you, God is the one who keeps you.
And that allows your life to be full so that you don't say, oh, I can only trust Jesus.
He's the only one I can trust.
No, because you trust Jesus, you can learn to take risks with others.
You can learn to repair broken relationships.
You can do all these things.
And so we're going to look at some of these takeaways together.
Here's the first one.
True friends stick with you when they have nothing to gain.
This is one of the ways you know.
Someone's your friend and a crisis occurs and
And everyone turns on you or they can't get anything from you and they still stick with you.
Here's what the Bible says in the book of Proverbs.
A friend loves at all times and a brother is born for a time of adversity.
It's when you are down.
It's when you are discouraged.
It's when you are desperate and need of help that real friends show up when they have nothing to gain.
It's David looking at it, Ty, and saying, March on.
It's Jonathan's armor bearer.
Look at him and say, I am with you, heart and soul.
We might die today, but we are going to die together.
This is worth it.
Our friendship is worth it.
And so here's the question.
Who in your life has stuck with you through the good times and the bad times and some of the conflicts?
Who has your back?
But if someone says, I heard
that so-and-so-and-so-and so-and so-and so-and you're like, no, no, no, no.
That's not my friend.
I've known my friend for 20, 30 years.
That's not who they are.
That's not how they respond.
I've watched them over and over.
Who has your back?
Who's stuck with you?
And listen, if someone comes in your mind right now, pull out your phone, go ahead, and just text them and put Proverbs 17 and 17.
Thank you for being a friend through times of adversity.
Thank you for being a faithful friend because
Sometimes we just need to remember who those faithful friends are and thank God for them.
Ultimately, the best friend you'll ever have is a man named Jesus.
He didn't just come for you and die for you and say, I'm the king, be by servant.
No, he says this to his disciples as he's getting ready to be arrested and crucified.
He says, I no longer call you servants because a servant does not know his master's business.
Instead, I've called you friends.
For everything that I've learned from my father, I have made known to you.
You see the intimacy in this conversation?
You're not just servants.
I'm the king.
You're my servant.
I've let you in on everything my father has told me.
I've drawn you and I trust you.
You are my trusted friend.
You are a friend of the king.
Now, this should blow our minds.
Because how many of you know that you can't always be trusted, that sometimes you say to God, God, I'll serve you, I'll honor you.
I won't ever do that again and you do it again.
And you fail your king.
And yet he says, I still trust you.
I still love you.
Get back up, try again.
I'm not calling you a servant.
It's not just about obedience.
It's about a relationship.
I call you friends.
I grew up in a church where we sing this song all the time.
What a friend we have in Jesus.
And then it goes through all these things.
This intimate friendship and relationship you can have with the almighty God.
This is what he's after.
And no matter how much you fail, he's always going to be there.
And listen, Jesus had nothing to gain to become your friend.
It's not like Jesus doesn't have to go, man, I really need Doug because without him, we're in trouble.
No, I was a mess.
I was a wreck.
I was in the pit and he pulled me out and said, hey, let's do this together.
I'm like, oh, okay, let's go.
Listen, all of us, if we're really asking, we get in the way of what God wants to do.
But yet he still chooses to use us because there's something about God that loves to work in and through his people.
What a friend we have in Jesus.
Aren't you grateful for Jesus, right?
He had nothing to gain and he's our trusted friend.
Here's the second idea we see in this passage.
Some enemies disguise themselves as friends.
Zippa is undercover, manipulating,
She realized outright just blatantly slandering.
I hit the fells, sort of been quietly rebelling.
You don't always know who your friends and enemies are.
And so how do we respond to that?
Well, the Bible says that we should not be overly, overly naive.
Proverbs 12, 26, a righteous person is cautious in friendship.
Watch people before you entrust yourself to them.
watch their character, watch their behavior.
A righteous person is cautious and friendship.
But we also shouldn't be, again, overly cynical or overly suspicious people and so isolated while the proverb says, if a person falls and they're all by themselves and they have no one to pick them up, you should pick that person.
In the moment of crisis, you have no friends at all.
You don't want to be that person either.
First Corinthians 4 says, judge nothing before the appointed time.
God will bring to light what's hidden and expose the motives of people's hearts.
And so let's process this for a minute.
Have you ever felt the sting of betrayal?
David writes in Psalm 41 that the person I ate bread with, my good friend, he turned on me.
And that sting of knowing someone you were really close to at one time, and then something happens, and you don't even understand it.
It can be so disorienting that you're like, I don't even know how that happened.
And I don't know where to go from here.
Do I trust anyone?
If I can't trust that person, then who can I trust?
And maybe I just don't give up on that friend.
I just give up on friendship altogether, and I just close off.
And one of the things that we want to be conscious of
How do we handle betrayal?
How do we handle a friendship that's close or a family member that's close?
David's dealing with his own son trying to kill him.
I mean, this happens in families, this happens in churches, this happens all the time because human beings are sinful and human beings don't always know how to express what they're thinking and feeling and they have expectations and all these things happening.
How did Jesus respond to betrayal?
Well, two things we see.
One is he didn't retaliate.
He didn't say, if you hurt me, I hurt you back.
Now, he took the humiliation.
He took the betrayal.
He took the insult and said, Father forgive them.
They don't know what they're doing.
But betrayal also didn't make him crumple into despair, or he was in fetal position in the dark all alone saying, I can't believe, I can't believe, I can't believe my life can't go on.
No, he took it because he knew it was in people and he went to the cross
And he died for those sins.
The sins of betrayal that you've experienced and maybe the sins of betrayal that you've orchestrated because all of us have this in us.
Maybe, maybe for you, it's like that.
I think with slander, you ever been slandered?
Oh, your guy named Ziba, I've ever been manipulated by someone using you.
They use you because
With you, I can get to this friend group.
I can get to this place of influence.
With you, I have access to money and resources.
And so there are people who use people like currency.
I'm talking to you because I want something from you.
They're not going to say that out loud, but they're thinking it.
And often, if we're honest, if we look at the Bible as a mirror, there are times that we've done that.
I want to meet with this person because if we have a good meeting, it's going to lead to this and this and this for me.
And the New Testament cautions Christians
Don't be the person who walks toward people for what you can get from them, but walk toward people so that you can serve them.
And this, again, is counter to the way the world thinks.
It's not the way that politics works.
It's not the way the economy works.
It's not the way that social media works, but it's the way the kingdom of God works.
It's the upside down kingdom.
And see, the reality, again, is that
Betrayal and slander and manipulation are the three things that we've all done to God.
Even if you think I've never done that to another person, which you probably have, you've done that to God.
Has anyone ever said, God, I'll never do that again.
I'll never turn my back in here.
I'll always stand for you.
I'll always do this and Tuesday comes and you betray your king.
Slander.
God, I love you, I'll worship you.
But in a rough moment, God, I don't know why you.
Why you didn't do that for me?
And I was talking to my friend, and I don't even know if it's worth following you.
And you're speaking about God in that way, or the church in that way, his bride, or manipulation.
God, I'll do this for you if you do this for me.
Like God's like a vending machine.
If I push this button, I get this, and then I do this for him.
God, if I honor you, then we have this agreement.
You're gonna make sure my business prospers, you're gonna make sure I stay healthy, you're gonna make my kids go good.
And if those don't happen, then I don't know if we're like good.
And the reality is that all of us in some ways do this with God, but aren't you grateful for the grace of Jesus Christ who knew that about us and died for us anyway while we're in our sin?
And that's why we're invited to be a friend of the King.
See, if you're in a moment of crisis in your life right now, here's the last thing we see in this text.
I think this is maybe one of the most encouraging parts of the story that new friendships can emerge in crisis.
Are you in a crisis right now?
And maybe a crisis of relationship in your family, at your job, with your friends?
That may be a gift to allow new friendships to emerge.
When Mary and Joseph were in the middle of a really rough moment and Herod's killing all the babies and then trying to get out, God sends a few friends, the Magi, and they've been gold and frankincense and myrrh to refresh Mary and Joseph in this moment.
David is in a crisis and a guy named Shobi and a guy named McEer and a guy named Marzillie, they come and they refresh David and it's sort of like a surprise.
When David's down, he doesn't realize these guys care for him or love him or would risk anything for him and yet they do.
The Bible says in Proverbs 1824, a man of many companions may come to ruin, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
If you have a lot of friends, you might not have the friend you need at the moment you need, but sometimes God will surprise you with new friends.
The Apostle Paul, when he became a Christian, well, let's say the day before he became a Christian, he had a lot of friends.
He was like the Pharisee of Pharisees.
He was like the head of the religious leaders.
He was a friend of the Roman government.
He had soldiers following him.
He had access to resources.
He had it all.
He was like the man.
When he met Gias on the road to Damascus, when he was knocked off his high horse, he lost all those friends.
Like in a day, he lost all of them.
And he was sort of stuck because no Christian would talk to him because they thought, oh, this guy was killing Christians on Saturday.
And now on Sunday, he says, he's a Christian.
He's not coming to my house.
So he was canceled by his old friends.
And he was canceled by the church, except for two men, a man named Ananias, who because God spoke to him invites Paul into his house and washes his wounds and washes his eyes and baptizes him and believes him and trusts in him.
And the man named Barnabas, who invites Saul to come and hang out with the disciples and build a new friendship and the apostle Paul becomes the apostle Paul, not just because he met Jesus on the road to Damascus, but because
in a crisis, some new friendships emerge, and that should make us curious.
God, I'm going through this really hard thing in my community, in my group, in my church, in my family, in my friend group, in my job, and maybe as you've revealed some things in people I didn't see, maybe there's a new friend you're bringing into my life.
There's a friend that sticks closer than a brother, and this is why our church is so passionate about you getting connected
Four out of 10 of you are like, I want to develop good and healthy friendships.
Maybe I just don't know how I don't know where the on-ramps are.
Listen, I mean, when I became a Christian, I lost all my friends that I partied with, and I didn't have a lot of new friends that were my age.
And so there's that lonely space in between you when you become a Christian, where you're like, I'm not really the same in this community anymore.
I don't know where my new community is, and if you're
praying, God help me to develop healthy friendships so I can grow in the community of the church.
Then God can provide that if you're looking for it and praying for it.
This is the best place to find those friendships.
I'm not saying you won't get hurt.
I'm only saying this is the best place for that healthy expression to go.
Right now my wife is in El Salvador and she's sending me all these pictures of like 12 different women who were there and they're doing this Calvary women outreach and they're
passing out like gifts to all these children in this community and they're doing church services and they're sharing the gospel.
And you see the joy on the faces of these women who say, we're gonna take a couple of days a week out of our life.
We're gonna travel to another country.
We're gonna go in this great adventure with Jesus and their hearts are being bound together.
They're gonna be friends for life because they stepped out into a new place, into a new moment and watch God work in their life.
And again, this is our heart for you as a church.
This is God's heart for you.
And so in this moment of David's life,
We see these friends and enemies emerge.
And I pray that, again, like David, as a follower of the king, that he is your first and chief friend, but that you also develop these beautiful, healthy friendships by taking risks, not by being naive, but by being cautious and watchful and careful in God in that process can put you in this powerful, beautiful community for the rest of your life.
Can we thank
God for the way that He does this work in the middle of these difficult moments, and let's take a moment and pray.
Father, we pray for everyone in this room that you would help us to find those faithful friends.
That you would help us to work through those issues that maybe separate us, unresolved conflict, unstated expectation.
Sometimes we don't have the courage to talk about it.
We just talk to others about it and it gets worse.
God help us to take down our barriers and allow our hearts to be open, and as we trust you, that you would do something beautiful.
And now I pray, if there's anyone in this room that doesn't know your love, I pray that you would draw them by your grace.
And I pray this in Jesus' name.
Hey, before I say amen, I wanna offer a simple invitation.
You could be a friend of the king,
This is the image of we see of Itai.
This is the image we see of Hushai.
This is the image we see of Abishai.
All these guys that are decided to be friends of the King because at some point in their life, they did this.
They did this.
I pledge my allegiance and my loyalty to you, you are my King.
And well, there's a greater King than David.
His name is Jesus.
David couldn't save people from their sins.
In fact, David let a lot of people down in his life, but Jesus came to be a greater David, a greater King.
He saw you that you were an enemy of God and he came in to this space to live in the dust, to live in the dirt, to breathe air, to experience all of the frustration and pain and futility that the world could bring.
And to be our mediator between us and God, to rebuild the bridge that was broken by our sin.
And then as one of his final acts, he died on the cross.
It didn't allow people to arrest him.
He gave up his life.
This was part of his mission, part of his plan to die in our place, a king who dies for his servants.
Who's heard of that?
This love, so great.
He laid down his life for people who were cursing at him.
And he said, father, forgive them.
They didn't know what they're doing.
And we have to do something with that.
When we see the king of the universe, the one who created all of us dying on a cross for us, we have to decide
Do I think that's nice?
That's for somebody else?
Or do I say, that's the king I want to follow?
So I'm going to bow my knee.
I'm going to confess that my sin is the one who brought him there and put him there.
I'm going to confess that I've lived my life, allegiance to myself.
I'm doing what I want, what I think, what I feel.
But now I want to say, Jesus, if you would do that for me, then there's nothing I wouldn't do for you.
So I admit I need to save you.
And I put my faith in trusting you.
So whatever happens next, it's not what I want to do.
It's what you want to do.
And the Bible calls that repentance.
I change the way I think about my life and who's in charge.
And if you've never done that, I want to invite you to do that today because here's what's at stake.
One day you're going to die and you're going to stand before God.
And the only person who gets into heaven is the person who has no sin on their account.
God doesn't say, well, you did more good than bad.
So yeah, you can come in.
Not everyone goes to heaven.
In fact, because of our sin, hell is our default destination.
The only people to get into heaven are the ones that say, I'm a friend of the king.
I'm with him.
And because he died on the cross and because I received his forgiveness, I have no debt to pay.
My debt has been paid in full.
And that requires a decision, an act of your will to say, I don't just pray when I'm in trouble.
I don't just pray to thank God for my food.
I don't just go to church because it makes me feel better about the way that I've had guilt in my life for the week.
So I stamp it, I feel good.
Now, this is a relationship with the living God, a relationship with the king where you can say, I'm a friend of the king, it's my identity.
It gives me my sense of purpose.
And you've been surrounded, right?
You're surrounded by people who have made that decision.
We are not perfect people.
but we are forgiven people, people who belong to the king.
And so here's how we give you an opportunity to make that decision.
We play a closing song and say, if you want to start a relationship with God through his son, Jesus, if you're ready to repent of your sins and give your life over to God, if you're ready to bow your knee and say, I'm gonna give my allegiance to one person, his name is Jesus.
Then we're gonna ask you to stand up from wherever you are as this song is being played and walked forward.
And we're gonna lead you in a very simple prayer.
And we're gonna celebrate with all of heaven as you come, if that's you.
Stand now and walk this way.
We have been praying for you and we can't wait to see what he's going to do in your life.
Come down.
There's still time to come if you're still in your seats because this is going to be a moment you don't want to miss.
Listen, we are.
We're clapping right now because we know what this means.
We know what it meant for us as you pray this prayer.
The Bible says every sin you've ever committed is going to be washed away, wiped away.
As far as the east is from the west, God separates that from you and all the blame and all the shame and all the stuff.
And as he writes your name in this book, called The Book of Life, and as he fills you with his spirit, he's going to begin to do the work of new creation.
And he's going to take some of that mess, some of that unresolved stuff, and he's going to turn into something beautiful.
He's going to make it a message because he's the Redeemer.
This is what he does.
And so you're about to say the most powerful words that will ever come out of your mouth for your entire life.
Because the Bible says, by your confession, that you confess Jesus is King, Jesus is Lord.
and you believe in your heart that God are raising you that the Bible says you will be saved.
And so if your hearts are ready, God's listening.
And he's been waiting for this moment your entire life.
Say this to God.
Lord God, I open my heart and I invite you inside.
Forgive my sin.
Today I repent.
Now fill me with your spirit and I will walk with you.
all the days of my life.
I pray this in Jesus name.
Amen.
Amen, guys.
Congratulations.
Welcome to the family of God.
So before you go back to your seats, I want to ask you for five minutes.
You just made that most important decision.
I want to meet you personally.
I want to give you a Bible as a gift.
You'll be back with your friends in a moment.
So follow this crew over here to the open door.
I'll meet you there.
Be back with your friends in a moment.
Church, let's give them a hand as they go and let's stand and close in a song of worship to our King Jesus who is worthy of our praise.
Thanks for listening to today's message.
Here at Calvary, we believe a relationship with Jesus changes everything.
And if you've decided to follow Jesus, we'd love for you to text the word believe to 31352, so you can find out what it means to follow Christ.
And to learn more about Calvary and all of our campuses, you're free to visit calvaryftl.org.